Live Network Streaming with Utilities and Cost
Ymir Vigfusson§ , Annie Liu† , Winnie Liu† , Yuanchao Zhu† , Gunnar S. Sigurbjornsson§ ,
Kristjan V. Jonsson§ , Qi Huang‡ , Ken Birman‡ , Daniel A. Freedman‡†
§ School

of Computer Science, Reykjavik University, Reykjavik, Iceland
of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
† School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
{ymir,kristjanvj,gunnars10}@ru.is, {ken,qhuang,dfreedman@cs.cornell.edu}
‡ Department

ABSTRACT
The growth in Internet traffic associated with video streaming and
sharing of videos is so rapid that it may soon dwarf all other forms
of Internet content. One reason for this is that only some forms of
content can be cached (such as movies). Data generated in real
time such as by live video broadcasts (e.g. sports games, IPTV or
new episodes of popular TV shows), chat systems, immersive virtual
reality applications and games typically can’t be cached at all, and
in today’s systems, each client may pull such information on its own
point-to-point (TCP) stream directly from the data center, even if
large numbers of clients share interest in at least some aspects of the
data. We propose a new system called G RADIENT aimed at reducing
the load on providers of such and enabling scalable, bandwidthsensitive streaming service for heterogeneous consumers. The core
of the system is an overlay networking architecture intended to
run directly on a content hosting platform, and which optimizes
aggregate bandwidth use by transforming in-flight data to match
the ideal stream quality – expressed as an economic utility – of the
consuming client.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Recent years have seen skyrocketing demand for Internet bandwidth,
increasingly dominated by real-time streaming of short-lived content; video is common, but in many forms: movies, Internet radio,
podcasts and others. If trends continue then Internet video alone
will generate almost 10 exabytes per month by the end of 2012,
accounting for nearly 50 percent of all Internet traffic [2]. Faced
with a competitive landscape, ISPs and content providers are exploring technologies to help satisfy the growing demand alongside the
purchase of expensive infrastructure.
Reducing the bandwidth consumption of simultaneous replicated
content is a challenge which usually leverages two main tools:
caching of content and multicasting. Some forms of video content, such as downloads of unencrypted movies or films where many
users will share the same encryption key, can be cached. For these
cases, a wide variety of caching options exist [5, 7], of which is
the Akamai content distribution network (CDN) is arguably the
most famous [9]. Likewise, multicast techniques can reduce the
overall network traffic by taking advantage of the packet replication
and forwarding within the network infrastructure. However, the deployment of the efficient network-level multicast (IP multicast [4])
over the wide-area Internet has failed [11] and so more expensive
application-level overlays are generally used [8].
The devices used by content subscribers have become increasingly
heterogeneous – mobile devices, for instance, are projected to consume over 7.6 exabytes of video per month in 2016 [3], implying
that a range of subscription rates and policies must be applied over
the user base [6]. Even if multiple users are streaming the same

event, such as watching the opening ceremony of the Olympics, a
smartphone user will need a differently transcoded version than the
people watching via Internet television (IPTV) or on their laptops.
As another example, different consumer groups may desire different
local ads or sub-titles to be embedded into their video streams. Even
further, avatars in a virtual world can be viewed as subscribers to
updates about objects in their vicinity, and may want more detailed
updates for objects that are closer to them in this world. While this
growing heterogeneity of device types, research on CDNs has generally assumed a homogeneous population of end-users [1, 13, 10].
Thus most current systems assume multiple video streams to be
sent from the source at different resolutions or that a single highquality stream is transcoded by the receiver who then incurs cost for
last-mile traffic owing to unnecessarily detailed video.
We pose the following question: How can we deliver live dynamic
content (such as video broadcasts, or financial stock data) over
the Internet to large number of heterogeneous users simultaneously
while balancing bandwidth costs, traffic rates and end-user utility?
Here, live content refers to content streams that must be transmitted
to multiple receivers simultaneously, such as a live broadcast, an
IPTV channel, ticker updates for financial stocks or object updates
in a virtual world. In particular, we are not focused on streams with
a pause or rewind functions or the video-on-demand problem.

2.

THE GRADIENT CDN

To make progress towards the research question, we propose a novel
networked content delivery system called G RADIENT to address
the complex caching and multicasting issues associated with live
streaming of dynamic content to a heterogeneous user population.
The systems architecture consists of one or more content providers
which together form a cooperative network of G RADIENT CDN
nodes. The CDN nodes form a dynamic overlay over which the
content is delivered, and for our initial prototypes we will look at
spanning trees. The concept of CDN nodes is general. An architecture in which CDN servers are hosted by ISPs to reduce redundant
incoming bandwidth is a logical scenario, and another example is
that G RADIENT nodes may as well be integrated into set-top boxes
[8]. Our approach to the problem resembles content-hosting, and in
fact the expected deployment model would employ a geographically
distributed set of ISPs or small data centers of the kind operated by
today’s CDN providers. However, whereas today’s content-hosting
sites cache objects (files, web pages) [9], our focus is on content that
cannot be usefully cached. The G RADIENT project aims to exploit
and develop two techniques that improve on existing CDNs: innetwork data transformation, and algorithms to balance bandwidth
costs with end-user utilities. Our design is focused on modularity
and incremental deployment.

8000

In-network data transformation. Dynamic content has substantial levels of redundancy, even when user interests are relatively
heterogeneous. Widespread use of streaming video occurs when
Internet users watch major events online (such as SuperBowl or the
Olympics), and like television users, such clients have little tolerance for lagged data. Here, large numbers of users have essentially
the same needs, but since they may access the streams from a variety
of devices (with different screen sizes and resolutions, or different
connectivity properties). The current solution is to provide each
user with a direct connection to a content-server due to the lack of
robust multicast technologies. Similar issues arise for newscasts
of fast-breaking events, transmission of financial data and virtual
on-line worlds.
Our insight is that a data-rich channel can be transformed on-thefly in-network to create the dynamic content for end-users. For
instance, we could add personalized advertisements, subtitles or
encryption keys to IPTV broadcasts; filters or aggregates to financial
stock updates, or reduce the update rate for distant objects in the
virtual world to which the user has subscribed. The same mechanism
will also allow the system to tailor to heterogeneous devices, e.g.
transcoding a high definition broadcast to adapt its resolution to
serve a population of heterogeneous devices – from cell phones to
tablets to IPTV – lowering overall bandwidth costs without affecting
viewing experience.
Specifically, the in-network transformations will be applied with
pluggable “serverlets” designed to execute within the CDN nodes
of G RADIENT. The serverlets encapsulate application-speciïňAc
˛
details such as the stream data format, client attributes, and the
ways to transform a the data-rich objects into more specialized ones.
Open issues include understanding what kinds of content may be
subject to such transformation and which dynamic content is not, to
assess the effect of the transformation on quality and traffic rates,
how transformation should be meaningfully expressed and used by
content providers, and to learn how computationally intensive such
transformation methods can be without overloading the nodes.
Balancing bandwidth costs with end-user utility. The G RADI ENT content delivery system is currently designed to use a spanningtree overlay, similar to most multicast network architectures, with
virtual links connecting G RADIENT CDN nodes. The question is
to determine what nodes the in-network processing and connecting
to the diverse end-users should be done. Specifically, we need to
optimize the overlay to deliver the exact stream quality demanded
by users while minimizing bandwidth costs. To do so, we propose
to apply an economics framework, considering two primary inputs
in determining the optimal network overlay. On the one hand, we
consider the cost for network edges to carry traffic, similar to standard bandwidth pricing. On the other, we leverage the perceived
utility by end-users for receiving the stream at a given quality.
As posed, the exact solution for this optimization problem is intractable – it is NP-complete. Nevertheless, we have developed
algorithms that give an approximate optimal solution. For instance,
in the case of video streams whose quality and traffic rates can be
downgraded by G RADIENT CDN nodes, we have derived a primaldual approximation algorithm which produces a solution whose total
cost (the difference between total network traffic costs and aggregate
end-user utilities) is within a factor of 5.986 of the optimal in the
worst case [12]. In Figure 1 we see that the algorithm has lower total
cost compared to a single stream source and a minimum spanning
tree streaming protocol in a simulation based on a collection of AS

6000

Gradient
MST
Naive Broadcast

Total Cost [$]

4000
2000
0
2000
4000
60000

50

100

150

200

System Size [# of Nodes]

250

300

Figure 1: Simulation. The G RADIENT optimization is effective
compared to a centralized source and a minimum spanning tree
(MST) protocol even as system sizes scale up. Error bars represent
one standard deviation over 25 trials.
sub-graphs. The details are deferred to a full report on G RADIENT.

3.

CONCLUSION

A number of interesting open questions remain the focus of our
continued investigation: How diverse are the classes of content that
are amenable to our in-network transformations? How do we best
assess the effect of such transformations on stream quality? How
should these transformations be expressed, designed, and utilized
by the originating content providers to best balance content-domain
specificity with ease of development? How can our overlay respond
to churn among G RADIENT nodes — realistically low in many
common cases such as video streaming, but higher in alternative
deployment scenarios? And, finally, how do we ensure that the computational intensity of our transformations do not place too much
load on our G RADIENT overlay nodes? In summary, G RADIENT
contributes a novel platform for continued study and progress to
ever more effective delivery mechanisms.

References

[1] M. Castro, P. Druschel, A. M. Kermarrec, A. Nandi, A. Rowstron, and A. Singh.
SplitStream: high-bandwidth multicast in cooperative environments. In SOSP,
page 313. ACM, 2003.
[2] Cisco. Approaching the Zettabyte Era. Cisco Visual Networking Index, page 23,
2008.
[3] Cisco. Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2009-2014. White Paper,
CISCO Systems Inc, 9, 2010.
[4] S. Deering and D. Cheriton. Multicast routing in datagram internetworks and
extended LANs. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 8(2):85–110,
1990.
[5] K. P. Gummadi, R. J. Dunn, S. Saroiu, S. D. Gribble, H. M. Levy, and J. Zahorjan.
Measurement, modeling, and analysis of a peer-to-peer file-sharing workload. In
SOSP, pages 314–329. ACM, 2003.
[6] D. Horn, E. Cheslack-Postava, and T. Azim. Scaling virtual worlds with a physical metaphor. IEEE Perv. Comp., 8(3):50–54, 2009.
[7] C. Huang, J. Li, and K. W. Ross. Can internet video-on-demand be profitable?
In SIGCOMM, pages 133–144. ACM, 2007.
[8] M. May, C. Diot, P. Le Guyadec, F. Picconi, J. Roussel, and A. Soule. Service
Hosting Gateways-a Platform for Distributed Service Deployment in End User
Homes. In SIGCOMM, pages 476–477. ACM, 2011.
[9] E. Nygren, R. K. Sitaraman, and J. Sun. The Akamai network. ACM SIGOPS
Operat. Sys. Rev., 44(3):2, Aug. 2010.
[10] S. Ratnasamy, P. Francis, M. Handley, R. Karp, and S. Shenker. A scalable content-addressable network. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Comm. Rev.,
31(4):161–172, 2001.
[11] Y. Vigfusson, H. Abu-Libdeh, M. Balakrishnan, K. Birman, R. Burgess,
G. Chockler, H. Li, and Y. Tock. Dr. Multicast: Rx for data center communication scalability. In EuroSys, pages 349–362, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
ACM.
[12] Y. Vigfusson, K. Birman, D. Freedman, Q. Huang, K. V. Jonsson, and G. Sigurbjornsson. Brief announcement: Live streaming with utilities, quality and cost.
In ACM PODC, 2012.
[13] S. Zhuang, B. Zhao, A. Joseph, R. Katz, and J. Kubiatowicz. Bayeux: An architecture for scalable and fault-tolerant wide-area data dissemination. In NOSSDAV, pages 11–20. ACM, 2001.

